---
title: Male feminists
date: 2014-09-26 18:39 AEST
tags:
---

I want to write about Emma Watson's recent
[HeForShe](http://www.heforshe.org/) speech and the discussion that has spawned
around it. In case you missed her speech, here it is:

<div class="video">
<iframe width="640" height="480" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/p-iFl4qhBsE" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen>
</iframe>
</div>

Thanks Emma, I was already a feminist. I think it's important that you're
inviting men to feminism. Speaking as a man, I definitely think that will help.
I think all your observations and statements ring true to me and I especially
liked the ones about how feminism can help men transform themselves into truer
versions of themselves.

## I'm a feminist

People aren't always comfortable with this fact. If more men are going to
become feminists, we need to normalise feminism amongst men. We need to make it
pretty mainstream. We probably need more famous strong, proud male feminists to
point to and say, "I am like that man."

Most of my life, I labelled myself a "pro-feminist" because calling myself a
feminist seemed presumptuous and not necessarily welcome by female feminists.
My first explicit invitation to feminism came from a man. Here it is:

<div class="video">
<iframe width="853" height="480" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/KTvSfeCRxe8" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</iframe>
</div>

Here's a man standing up and saying that violence against women *is a men's
issue*. Please notice a few things. He's a man. He talks about male culture. He
credits and incorporates feminism into his message. I think Jackson Katz is an
example of what Emma Watson is calling for: more men speaking up to other men
to help change whatever it is that's leading men to beat up (and discriminate
against) women.

Here's another male feminist I admire:

<div class="video">
<iframe width="853" height="480" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/SPzVUGE3dds" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

I feel like the collective take home message from these men is that you can be
an unabashed and unqualified feminist and a strong and proud man at the same
time. Not only is that congruous, in fact feminism *requries* men be extremely
mature and strong to stand up and challenge the status quo both in themselves
and in those around them. Feminism can be extremely hard sometimes. Man up.

Here are my experiences with it.

## I don't listen enough

I want to make sure I'm getting it right. I do not want to be a white male
authority on what it's like to be discriminated against. That'd be offensive
like old white men debating abortion in the Senate or white male conservative
journalists telling Aborigines they have it too good.

So I shut up and pay attention, I think about it a lot, I try to walk a mile in
a woman's shoes (sprained ankles ahoy) and yet, a lifetime of positive
reinforcement doesn't unknit itself in one sitting. Sometimes I force myself to
be silent and just take it all in without interruption. Sometimes I have to.
Sometimes I fail at that and try again later.

I doubt I can ever really listen enough. I acknowledge that and cherish the
occasions when women in my life want to shout at me. Those are my chances to
listen.

## I get hurt

I get called names. Gender betrayer, reverse sexist, lecherous point scorer,
brown noser, fake feminist, mansplainer. My noble motives get rubbished
sometimes, I have been ridiculed and hated by certain men and women, feminists
and not-feminists.

Here's what a search engine predicts when you type in "feminists are" and let
it guess what comes next:

![Feminists Are](/opinion/articles/male-feminists/feminists_are.jpg)

Yep, that's pretty much what you'll encounter if you walk around calling
yourself a feminist.

## I get it wrong

I do get it wrong sometimes. I may be completely well meaning and come along
and say something vastly ill considered like, "I think women mistrusting men is
a problem," and while this may seem like an insightful
contribution to the conversation about men and women working together to solve
sexism, the woman standing next to me who was beaten by her husband has just
been asked to forget it like it was nothing and start trusting the main
demographic that murders her gender. Not. Helping.

I hope that I have learned how to recognise when I'm totally completely wrong,
apologise properly, forgive myself and move on. Chances are it'll happen again
some time. I have to have a thick skin and keep a firm grip on the bigger
picture. Emma Watson's invitation to men does not imply that feminism is easy,
fun, or quick.

## I am sexist

I was born into a sexist culture. I was treated differently to my sister. My
mother couldn't protect me from gendered marketing, school teachers, aunts and
uncles, conservative grandparents, or even her own subconscious prejudices. I
can't properly credit the incremental effect of each year of being treated
differently since birth. I am certain it affects my self confidence in
countless ways. Everybody is a product of their environment and upbringing.
Yes, free will and all that, but the dice are pretty loaded.

So I forgive myself and allow myself to be sexist and a feminist at the same
time. I acknowledge that discrimination exists, I am against it, and I act on
it - that makes me a feminist in my estimation. I acknowledge that I still have
more to learn - I still harbour sexism unwittingly. I don't like that fact but
I accept it. I am not a bad person just for having been raised a certain way.

The benefit of this mentality is that when I invariably encounter feminists
(usually women who are far more experienced with feminism than I am) who
critique my views, I don't take it personally and I am able to ponder the
points they're making fairly dispassionately. Some feminists are not very nice
people but here's the thing: they don't have to be nice, to be right. Some have
very understandable reasons to be fed up, angry, or hurt. So I try to be
mature, sympathetic, healthy, skeptical, rational, and incorporate new
knowledge, no matter how angry the messenger is.

## I lose friends

I feel the most important contribution that male feminists can make is
reforming male culture from the inside. I feel like the most direct way to do
that is to confront sexism amongst male friends.

The standard you walk past is the standard you accept. Our Chief of Army
doesn't mince words.

<div class="video">
<iframe width="853" height="480" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/QaqpoeVgr8U" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

I once worked at a company of mostly male computer programmers. I vividly
recall one evening when the last woman left and it was just a random group of
men left behind. One of them swung his office chair around to face us and
launched into rape jokes. They were met with a cautious
acceptance at first. Then a couple of the other men responded with similar humour. I found
it incredibly disconcerting. I know several women in my life who have been
raped. I kept my mouth shut that first day but when it happened again I found
myself telling him in front of everybody that I personally found rape jokes
intolerable, that I was sensitive to them, that I felt they normalised that
behaviour and I would appreciate it if he never made them in my presence. That
was a pretty tense exchange.

I felt pretty awful for a few days. I beat myself up over it. I shouldn't have
done it in front of others, that was needlessly shaming him and not productive.
The office mood had chilled somewhat. He was a valuable staff member and he'd
leave. Everybody would think I was an over-sensitive snark. Confrontation has
this way of staining your psyche. It's like a bunch of karma gets dumped on you
and you need time to let it go again. If you've experienced road rage... it
felt like that. I felt hated.

Yet, really good things happened. The mood improved with time. Although I doubt
it stopped the guy behaving that way elsewhere, it did help set the standards
of the office. Lastly, the best thing, later in life one of the other men
confessed that my objections had helped initiate his now flourishing feminism.

I find it hard to imagine how female feminists are going to address that kind
of "underground" sexism. as easily as men. It's not always that bad, but it
seems common to me. Have you heard a woman say, "He's a great boyfriend, except
when he's around his mates"? I think this is where male feminists can really
shine.

This is a really hard sell. Make no mistake, initiating confrontation is not
easy. It feels damaging and counterproductive. It can easily result in damage
and loss in your own life. Yet, my experience has been that it has always,
always been worth it in bigger and often unforeseen ways.

If you are going to do something like this, I recommend trying to strike a tone
that is "firm and kind". Deliver it with warmth or understanding but don't
compromise on the details. Remember that sentences that start with "I" are a
lot less aggressive. If you want further advice, I recommend the book Crucial
Conversations.

## It's worth it

Since being a less enlightened teenage boy, I have started to notice sexism
more and more, in movies, in computer games, in etiquette, in language, at
work, at the dinner table, just... everywhere. It confounds and amazes
me how I had led half my life not really noticing or acknowledging
something so ubiquitous. Privilege blindness is incredibly powerful. I can't
stress that enough. It's been years and I am still spotting things I never
noticed before. We're talking about most of human history here, people.

Feminism is hard work. I have to be tough as nails to cope gracefully with
the repeated challenges to my ego, to my intellect, to my assumptions.
But like most forms of tough work, it's also incredibly rewarding.

Each hit to my ego heals better than before. Each friend I lose after
confrontation is usually replaced by three new ones. For each time I get it
wrong and feel terrible, I also manage to get it right and feel like I am
helping make the world better.

Making the world better is incredibly satisfying. I reserve the right to revel
in that and feel proud of myself. Look forward to that, male feminists. It is
worth the hardship. It is worth manning up.

